Hinduism is not a religion but a way of life.

The beauty of Hinduism lies in its all embracing
ir.d us iv eness . Hind uism tells eve ry one 1 o worsh 1 p
God according to his own faith or dlwma, and so it
lives at peace with all the religions. Its freedom
from dogma makes a forcible appeal to me
inasm uch as it gives the votary the largest scope for

self-expression.

,

Non-violence is common to all religions, but it has
found the highest expression and application in
Hinduism.

Hinduism is a growth ofages.

Htnduism abhors stagnation.


expounds the essence of Hinduism


Rs 45.00


ISJJN 978-8 H 237-0927-7




What is Hinduism?


MAHATMA GANDHI


On behalf of

Indian Council of Historical Research



National Book Trust, India




Contents


Preface vii

1. What is Hinduism? 1

2. Is there Satan in Hinduism? 2

3. Why I am a Hindu? 3

4. Hinduism 6

5. Sanatana Hindu 11

6. Some Objections Answered 12

7. The Congress and After 15

8. My Mission 17

9. Hindu-Muslim Tension: 19

Its Causes and Cure

10. What may Hindus do? 21

11. Hinduism of Today 24

12. The Hydra-headed Monster 28

13. Tulsidas 30

14. Weekly Letter (Other Questions) 33

15. Weekly Letter (A talk with 36

Rao Bahadur Rajah)

16. Weekly Letter (The Golden Key) 37

17. The Haripad Speech 41

18. From the Kottayam Speech 45



!

| 19.

Yajna or Sacrifice

48

i 20.

Brahman Non-Brahman Question

53

21.

God and Congress

56

22.

Advaitism and God

58

23.

God Is

61

24.

Letter from Europe

64

25,

Approach Temples in Faith

68

26.

The Meaning of the Gita

70

27.

Krishna Janmashtami

79

28.

The Message of the Gita

81

29.

From Yeravda Mandir

90

30.

Gita Reciters

93

31.

The Gita Ideal

95

32.

Non-Violence

97

33.

Hindu-Muslim Tension:

Its Causes and Cure

99

! 34.

No Conversion Permissible

102

! 35.

Equality of Religions

104

36.

Equality of Religions

106

! 37.

i

Attitude of Christian Missions to

Hinduism

109

| 38.

Equality of Religions

111

j 39.

Gandhiji and the Suppressed Classes

113

1 40.

The Sin of Untouchability

115

1 41.

Weekly Letter

116

1 42.

The Thousand Headed Monster

117

43.

Dr. Ambedkar's Indictment

119


Preface

! On the occasion of the 125th birth anniversary of
I Mahatma Gandhi, it gives me great pleasure to place
I before the wider community his rich understanding of
i Hindu Dharma. The articles included in this selection
| have been drawn mainly from Gandhiji's contributions
to Young India, the Harijan and the Navapvan, in both
Hindi andGujarati. But even though these contributions
were written on different occasions, they present a
picture of Hindu Dharma which is di fficult to surpass in
its richness, its comprehensiveness and its sensitivity to
the existential dilemmas of human existence.

The Mahatma's reflections on 'What is Hindu
Dharma' would be invaluable at any p oint of time. How-
ever, I believe that they are particularly relevant at the
present juncture.

In bringing out this selection, 1 have been greatly
assisted by my colleague in the Nehru Museum and its
Deputy Director, Dr Hari Dev Sharma. I am also deeply
beholden to the National Book Trust for undertakmg
the publication of this book, on behalf of the Indian
Council of Historical Research, in a very short span of
time.

RAVTNDER KUMAR
Chairman

Indian Council of Historical Research
26 April 1994 New Delhi




1


What is Hinduism?


It is the good fortune or the misfortune of Hinduism |
that it has no official creed. In order therefore to protect !
myself against any misunderstanding I have said Truth
and Non-violence is my creed. If 1 were asked to define
the Hindu creed I should simply say: search after Truth
through non-violent means. A man may not believe
even in God and still he may call himself a Hindu.
Hinduism is a relentless pursuit after truth and if today
it has become moribund, inactive, irresponsive to growth,
it is because we are fatigued; and as soon as the fatigue
is over, Hinduism will burst forth upon the world with j
a brilliance perhaps unknown before. Of course, there- j
fore, Hinduism is the most tolerant of all religions. Its j
creed is all-embracing.

Young India , 24 April 1924


What is Hinduism? 1



Is there Satan in Hinduism?


| In my opinion the beauty of Hinduism lies in its all-
j embracing inclusiveness. What the divine author of the
I Mahabharata said of his great creation is equally true of
Hinduism. What of substance is contained in any other
religion is always to be found in Hinduism. And what
is not contained in it is insubstantial or unnecessary.

Young India, 17 September 1925




2 What is Hi ndu ism ?





Why I am a Hindu? !

An American friend who subscribes herself as a lifelong i
friend of India writes:

As Hinduism is one of the prominent religions of j
the East, and as you have made a study of Christi- ,
anity and Hinduism, and on the basis of that study
have announced that you are a Hindu, I beg leave
to ask of you if you will do me the favour to givenie
your reasons for that choice. Hindus and Chris-
tians alike realize that man's chief need is to know
God and to worship Him in spirit and in truth.
Believing that Christ was a revelation of God,
Christians of America have sent to India thou- j
sands of their sons and daughters to tell the people j
of India about Christ. Will you in return kindly
give us your interpretation of Hinduism and make
a comparison of Hinduism with the teachings of
Christ? 1 will be deeply grateful for this favour. |
T have ventured at several missionary meetings to
tell English and American missionaries that if they ;
could have refrained from 'telling' India about Christ
and had merely lived the life enjoined upon them by the

Why I am a Hindu? 3



Sermon on the Mount, India instead of suspecting them
would have appreciated their living in the midst of her
.. children and directly profited by their presence. Hold-
ing this view, I can 'tell' American friends nothing about
Hinduism by way of 'return'. I do not believe in people
telling others of their faith, especially with a view to
conversion. Faith does not admit of telling. It has to be
lived and then it becomes self-propagating.

Nor do I consider myself fit to interpret Hinduism
except through my own life. And if I may not interpret
Hinduism through my written word, I may not com-
pare it with Christianity. The only thing it is possible for
me therefore to do is to say as briefly as I can, why 1 am
j a Hindu.

j Believing as I do in the influence of heredity, being

bom in a Hindu family, I have remained a Hindu. 1
should reject it, if I found it inconsistent with my moral
sense or my spiritual growth. On examination I have
[ found it to be the most tolerant of all religions known to
| me. Its freedom from dogma makes a forcible appeal to
| me inasmuch as it gives the votary the largest scope for
self-expression. Not being an exclusive religion, it en-
ables the followers of that faith not merely to respect all
the other religions, but it also enables them to admire
and assimilate whatever may be good in the other
| faiths. Non-violence is common to all religions, but it
| has found the highest expression and application in
Hinduism. (I do not regard Jainism or Buddhism as
separate from Hinduism.) Hinduism believes in the
. oneness not of merely all human life but in the oneness
j of all that lives. Its worship of the cow is, in my opinion,

| its unique contribution to the evolution of humanitari-
| anism. It is a practical application of the belief in the
I oneness and, therefore, sacredness, of all life. The great
belief in transmigration is a direct consequence of that

4 What is Hinduism?


| belief. Finally the discovery of the law of varnashrama is j
S a magnificent result of the ceaseless search for truth. I. j
| must not burden this article with definitions of the j
I essentials sketched here, except to say that the present j
j ideas of cow-worship and varnashrama are a caricature j
| of what in my opinion the originals are. In this all too
| brief a sketch I have mentioned what occurs to me to be
| the outstanding features of Hinduism that keep me in
j its fold.

i

| Young India, 20 October 1927


Why l am a Hindu?


5




4


Hinduism


I have asserted my claim to being a Sanatani Hindu, and
yet there are things which are commonly done in the
name of Hinduism, which I disregard. I have no desire
to be called a Sanatani Hindu or any other if I am not
such. It is therefore necessary for me once for all dis-
tinctly to give my meaning of Sanatana Hinduism. The
word Sanatana I use in its natural sense.

I call myself a Sanatani Hindu, because,

1. I believe in the Vedas, the Upanishads, the Puranas
and all that goes by the name of Hindu scriptures,
and therefore in avataras and rebirth;

2. Ibelieve in the varnashrama dharma in a sense, inmy
opinion, strictly Vedic but not in its present popu-
lar and crude sense;

3. 1 believe in the protection of the cow in its much
larger sense than the popular;

4. I do not disbelieve in idol-worship.

The reader will note that I have purposely re-
frained from using the word divine origin in reference
to the Vedas or any other scriptures. For I do not believe
in the exclusive divinity of the Vedas. I believe the Bible,



What is Hinduism?


; the Quran, and the Zen d A vesta to be as much divinely :
inspired as the Vedas. My belief in the Hindu scriptures
does not require me to accept every word and every
verse as divinely inspired. Nor do I claim to have any
firsthand knowledge of these wonderful books. But I
do claim to know and feel the truths of the essential
teaching of the scriptures. I decline to be bound by any
interpretation, however learned it may be, if it is repug-
nant to reason or moral sense. 1 do most emphatically
repudiate the claim (if they advance any such) of the |
present Shankaracharyas and shastris to give a correct
interpretation of the Hindu scriptures. On the contrary
Ibelieve that our present knowledge of these books is in ;

a most chaotic state. 1 believe implicitly in the Hindu
aphorism, that no one truly knows the shastras who has
not attained perfection in Innocence ( ahimsa ), Truth
(satya) and Self-control ( brahmacharya ) and who has not
renounced all acquisition or possession of wealth. I
believe in the institution of gurus, but in this age mil-
lions must go without a guru, because it is a rare thing
to find a combination of perfect purity and perfect
learning. But one need not despair of ever knowing the
truth of one's religion, because the fundamentals of
Hinduism, as of every great religion, are unchangeable,
and easily understood. Every Hindu believes in God j
and his oneness, in rebirth and salvation.

1 can no more describe my feeling for Hinduism
than for my own wife. She moves me as no other wo-
man in the world can. Not that she has no faults. I dare
say she has many more than I see myself. But the feeling
of an indissoluble bond is there. Even so I feel for and
about Hinduism with all its faults and limitations.
Nothing elates me so much as the music of the Gita or
th eRamayana by Tulsidas, the only two books in Hindu-
ism I may be said to know. When I fancied 1 was taking '


Hinduism


7


I my last breath the Gita was my solace. I know the vice
that is going on today in all the great Hindu shrines, but
1 love them in spite of their unspeakable failings. There
is an interest which I take in them and which I take in no
other. I am a reformer through and through. But my
zeal never takes me to the rejection of any of the
essential things of Hinduism. I have said I do not
disbelieve in idol-worship. An idol does not excite any
feeling of veneration in me. But 1 think that idol-wor-
ship is part of human nature. We hanker after symbo-
lism. Why should one be more composed in a church
than elsewhere? Images are an aid to worship. No
Hindu considers an image to be God. I do not consider
idol-worship a sin.

It is clear from the foregoing, that Hinduism is not
an exclusive religion. In it there is room for the worship
of all the prophets of the world. It is not a missionary
religion in the ordinary sense of the term. It has no
I doubt absorbed many tribes in its fold, but this absorp-
tion has been of an evolutionary imperceptible charac-
ter. Hinduism tells every one to worship God according
to his own faith or dharma, and so it lives at peace with
i all the religions.

That being my conception of Hinduism, I have
never been able to reconcile myself to untouchability. I
have always regarded it as an excrescence. It is true that
it has been handed down to us from generations, but so
are many evil practices even to this day. I should be
ashamed to think that dedication of girls to virtual
prostitution was a part of Hinduism. Yet it is practised
by Hindus in many parts of India. I consider it positive
irreligion to sacrifice goats to Kali and do not consider
it apart of Hinduism. Hinduism is a growth of ages. The
very name, Hinduism, was given to the religion of the j
people of Hindustan by foreigners. There was no doubt


8


What is Hinduism?


I at one time sacrifice of animals offered in the name of
religion. But it is not religion, much less is it Hindu
religion. And so also it seems to me, that when cow-
protection became an article of faith with our ancestors,
those who persisted in eating beef were excommuni-
cated. The civil strife must have been fierce. Social
boycott was applied not only to the recalcitrants, but
their sins were visited upon their children also. The
practice which had probably its origin in good inten-
tions hardened into usage, and even verses crept into
our sacred books giving the practice a permanence


wholly undeserved and still less justified. Whether my
theory is correct dr not, untouchability is repugnant to
reason and to the instinct of mercy, pity or love. A
religion that establishes the worship of the cow cannot
possibly countenance or warrant a cruel and inhuman
boycott of human beings. And I should be content to be

Hindus will certainly never deserve freedom, nor get it.



if they allow their noble religion to be disgraced by the
retention of the taint of untouchability. And as 1 love
Hinduism dearer than the life itself, the taint has be-
come for me an intolerable burden. Let us not deny God
by denying to a fifth of our race the right of association


on an equal footing.


i Young India, 6 October 1921



Hinduism


9




5


Sanatana Hindu


j [To a correspondent who criticised his interpretation of
! Hinduism Gandhiji wrote:]

I am not a literalist. Therefore I try to understand
| the spirit of the various scriptures of the world. I apply
i the test of Truth and Ahimsa laid down by these very
| scriptures for interpretation. I reject what is inconsistent
| w jth that test, and I appropriate all that is consistent
j with it. The story of a shudra having been punished by
Ramachandra for daring to learn the Vedas I reject as an
interpolation. And in any event, I worship Rama, the
perfect being of my conception, not r historical person
facts about whose life may vary with the progress of
new historical discoveries and researches. Tulsidas had
nothing to do with the Rama of history. Judged by
historical test, his Ramayana would be fit for the scrap
heap. As a spiritual experience, his book is almost
unrivalled at least for me. And then, too, 1 do not swear
b every word that is to be found in so many editions
published as the Ramayana of Tulsidas. It is the spirit
running through the book that holds me spellbound. I
cannot myself subscribe to theprohibition against shudras


10


What is Hinduism?


| learning the Vedas . Indeed, in my opinion, at the present
[ moment, we are all predominantly shudras, so long as
; we are serfs. Knowledge cannot be the prerogative of
any class or section. But I can conceive the impossibility
of people assimilating higher or subtler truths unless
they have undergone preliminary training, even as
those who have not made preliminary preparations are
quite unfit to breathe the rarefied atmosphere in high
I altitudes, or those who have no preliminary training in
simple mathematics are unfit to understand or assimi-
late higher geometry or algebra. Lastly, 1 believe in
certain healthy conventions . There is a con venti on sur-
rounding the recitation of the Gayatri. The convention is
that it should be recited only at stated times and after
ablutions performed in the prescribed manner. As I
believe in those conventions, and as 1 am not able
always to conform to them, for years past 1 have fol-
lowed the later Saints, and therefore have satisfied i
myself with the Dwadashakshara Mantra of the Bhagazoata \
or the still simpler formula of Tulsidas and a few !
selections from the Gita and other works, and a few |
bhajanas in Prakrit. These are my daily spiritual food — my j
Gayatri. They give me all the peace and solace 1 need
from day to day.

Young India , 27 August 1925


Sanatana Hindu


11




6


| Some Objections Answered

I want to see the spinning wheel everywhere, because I
see pauperism everywhere. Not until and unless we
have fed and clothed the skeletons of India, will religion
have any meaning for them. They are living the cattle-
life today, and we are responsible for it. The spinning
wheel is therefore a penance for us. Religion is service
of the helpless. God manifests Himself to us in the form
of the helpless and the stricken. But we in spite of our
forehead marks take no notice of them i.e. of God. God
is and is not in the Vedas. He who reads the spirit of the
Vedas sees God therein. He who clings to the letter of the
Vedas is a vedia — a literalist. Narasinha Mehta does
indeed sing the praise of the rosary, and the praise is
well-merited where it is given. But the same Narasinha
has sung:

j Of what avail is the tilaka and the tulsi, of what avail

is the rosary and the muttering of the Name, what
avail is the grammatical interpretation of the Veda,
what avail is the mastery of the letters? All these
are devices to fill the belly and nothing worth
without their helping to a realization of the


12


What is Hinduism?


\ Parabrahma. ;

The Mussulman does count the beads of his tasbih, j
and the Christian of the rosary. But both would think j
themselves fallen from rel igion if their tasbih and rosary j
I prevented them from running to the succour of one j

j who, for instance, was lying stricken with a snake-bite. 1

Mere knowledge of the Vedas cannot make our brahmanas
spiritual preceptors. If it did. Max Muller would have
become one. The brahmana who has understood the
i religion of today will certainly give Vedic learning a
secondary place and propagate the religion of the spin-
ning wheel, relieve the hunger of the millions of his
starving countrymen and only then, and not until then,
lose himself in Vedic studies.

1 have certainly regarded spinning superior to the
practice of denominational religions. But that does not
mean that the latter should be given up. I only mean that
a dharma which has to be observed by the followers of all
j religions transcends them, and hence I say that a
brahmana is a better brahmana, a Mussulman a better
Mussulman, a Vaishnava a better Vaishnava, if he turns
the wheel in the spirit of service.

If it was possible for me to turn the wheel in my
bed, and if 1 felt that it would help me in concentrating
my mind on God, I would certainly leave the rosary
aside and turn the wheel. If 1 am strong enough to turn ;
the wheel, and 1 have to make a choice between coun-
ting beads or turning the wheel, I would certainly
decide in favour of the wheel, making it my rosary, so
long as I found poverty and starvation stalking the land.

I do look forward to a time when even repeating the
name of Rama will become a hindrance. When I have
realized that Rama transcends even speech, I shall have
no need to repeat the name. The spinning wheel, the
rosary and the Ramanama are all the same to me. They


Some Objections Answered


13


subserve the same end, they teach me the religion of j
service. I cannot practise ahimsa without practising the \
religion of service, and I cannot find the truth without
practising the religion of ahimsa. And there is no religion j
other than truth. Truth is Rama, Narayana, Ishwara, \
Khuda, Allah, God. [As Narasinha says, 'The different
shapes into which gold is beaten gives rise to different
names and forms; but ultimately it is all gold.']

Young India, 14 August 1924


14



7


j The Congress and After

i

In the name of religion we Hindus have made a fetish of !
outward observances, and have degraded religion by i
making it simply a question of eating and drinking.
Brahmanism owes its unrivalled position to its self-
| abnegation, its inward purity, its severe austerity — all
| these illumined by knowledge. Hindus are doomed if
| they attach undue importance to the spiritual effects of
foods and human contacts. Placed as we are in the midst
of trials and temptations from within, and touched and
polluted as we are by all the most untouchable and the
; vilest thought currents, let us not, in our arrogance,
exaggerate the influence of contact with people whom
we often ignorantly and more often arrogantly consider
to be our inferiors. Before the Throne of the Almighty |
we shall be judged, not by what we have eaten nor by !
i whom we have been touched by but by whom we have '

| served and how. Inasmuch as we serve a single human
| being in distress, we shall find favour in the sight
of God. Bad and stimulating or dirty foods we must
; avoid as we must avoid bad contact. But let us not give
j these observances a place out of all proportion to their


What is Hinduism?


The Congress and After


15



importance. We dare not use abstinence from certain
foods as a cover for fraud, hypocrisy, and worse vices.
We dare n ot refuse to serve a fallen ora dirty brother lest
his contact should injure our spiritual growth.

Young India , 5 January 1992


16


What is Hinduism?



My Mission


1 do not consider myself worthy to be mentioned in the
same breath with the race of prophets. I am a humble
seeker after truth. I am impatient to realize myself, to
attain moksha in this very existence. My national service
is part of my training for freeing my soul from the
bondage of flesh. Thus considered, my service may be
regarded as purely selfish. I have no desire for the
perishable kingdom of earth. 1 am striving for the
Kingdom of Heaven which is moksha. To attain my end
it is not necessary for me to seek the shelter of a cave. 1
carry one about me, if I would but know it. A cave-
dweller can build castles in the air whereas a dweller in
a palace like Janak has no castles to build. The cave-
dweller who hovers round the world on the wings of
thought has no peace. A Janak though living in the
midst of 'pomp and circumstance' may have peace that
passeth understanding. For me the road to salvation lies
through incessant toil in the service of my country and
therethrough of humanity. I want to identify myself
with everthing that lives. In the language of the Gita I
want to live at peace with both friend and foe. Though


My Mission


17


1 therefore a Mussulman or a Christian or a Hindu may
despise me and hate me. I want to love him and serve
him even as I would love my wife or son though they
hate me. So my patriotism is for me a stage in my
journey to the land of eternal freedom and peace. Thus
it will be seen that for me there are no politics devoid of
religion. They subserve religion. Politics bereft of reli-
gion are a death-trap because they kill the soul.

Young India, 3 April 1924


18


What is Hinduism?



Hindu-Muslim Tension
Its Causes and Cure


In my opinion there is no such thing as proselytism in
Hinduism as it is understood in Christianity or to a
lesser extent in Islam. The Arya Samaj has, I think,
copied the Christians in planning its propaganda. The
modem method does not appeal to me. It has done
more harm than good. Though regarded as a matter of
the heart purely and one between the Maker and one-
self, it has degenerated into an appeal to the selfish
instinct. The Arya Samaj preacher is never so happy as
when he is reviling other religions. My Hindu instinct
tells me that all religions are more or less true. All
proceed from the same God, but all are imperfect hu-
man instrumentality. The real shuddhi movement should
consist in each one trying to arrive at perfection in his or
her own faith. In such a plan character would be the only
test. What is the use of crossing from one compartment
to another, if it does not mean a moral rise? What is the
meaning of my trying to convert to the service of God
(for that must be the implication of shuddhi or tabligh)
when those who are in my fold are every day denying


Hindu-Muslim Tension


19


God by their actions? 'Physician, heal thyself' is more
true in matters religious than mundane. But these are
my views. If the Arya Samajists think that they have a
call from their conscience, they have a perfect right to
conduct the movement. Such a burning call recognizes
no time limit, no checks ofexperience. If Hindu-Muslim
unity is endangered because an Arya Samaj preacher or
a Mussulman preacher preaches his faith in obedience
to a call from within, that unity is only skin-deep. Why
should we be ruffled by such movements? Only they
must be genuine. If the Malkanas wanted to return to
the Hindu fold, they had a perfect right to do so when-
ever they liked. But no propaganda can be allowed
which reviles other religions. For that would be nega-
tion of toleration. The best way of dealing with such
propaganda is to publicly condemn it.

Young India , 29 May 1924


20


What is Hinduism?




10


What may Hindus do? j

Though the majority of the Mussulmans of India and
the Hindus belong to the same 'stock', the religious
environment has made them different. I believe and I
have noticed too that thought transforms man's fea-
tures as well as character. The Sikhs are the most recent
illustration of the fact. The Mussulman being generally
in a minority has as a class developed into a bully.
Moreover, being heir to fresh traditions he exhibits the
virility of a comparatively new system of life. Though in
my opinion non-violence has a predominant place in
the Quran, the thirteen hundred years of imperialistic
expansion has made the Mussulmans fighters as a
body. They are therefore aggressive. Bullying is the
natural excrescence of an aggressive spirit. The Hindu
has an ages-old civilization. He is essentially non-vio-
lent. His civilization has passed through the experi-
ences that the two recent ones are still passing through.

If Hinduism was ever imperialistic in the modem sense
of the term, it has outlived its imperialism and has either
deliberately or as a matter of course given it up. Pre-
dominance of the non-violent spirit has restricted the


What may Hindus do?


21



j use of arms to a small minority which must always be
j subordinate to a civil power highly spiritual, learned
and selfless. The Hindus as a body are therefore not
equipped for fighting. But not having retained their
spiritual training, they have forgotten the use of an
effective substitute for arms, and not knowing their use
nor having an aptitude for them, they have become
docile to the point of timidity or cowardice. This vice is
therefore a natural excrescence of gentleness. Holding
this view, Ido not think that the Hindu exclusiveness,
bad as it undoubtedly is, has much to do with the Hindu
timidity. Hence also my disbelief in akhadas as a means
of self-defence. I prize them for physical culture but, for
self-defence, I would restore the spiritual culture. The
best and most lasting self-defence is self-purification. I
refuse to be lifted off my feet because of the scares that
haunt us today. If Hindus would but believe in them-
! selves and work in accordance with their traditions,
they will have no reason to fear bullying. The moment
they recommence the real spiritual training the
Mussulman will respond. He cannot help it. If I can get
together a band of young Hindus with faith in them-
selves and therefore faith in the Mussulmans, the band
will become a shield for the weaker ones. They (the
young Hindus) will teach how to die without killin g I
know no other way. When our ancestors saw affliction
surrounding them, they went in for tapasya — purifi-
cation. They realized the helplessness of the flesh and in
their helplessness they prayed till they compelled the
Maker to obey their call. 'O yes,' says my Hindu friend,
'but then God sent some one to weild arms.' I am not
concerned with denying the truth of the retort. All I say
to the friend is that as a Hindu he may not ignore the
cause and secure the result. It will be time to fight when
we have done enough tapasya. Are we purified enough?

I 22 What is Hinduism? j


L


I ask. Have we even done willing penance for the sin of i
untouchabilit, , let alone the personal purity of indi- 1
viduals? Are our religious preceptors all that they should j
be? We are beating the air whilst we simply concentrate !
our attention upon picking holes in the Mussulman j
| conduct. ;

j

Young India f 19 June 1924 i


What may Hindus do?


23




11


Hinduism of Today

Hinduism is a living organism liable to growth and
decay, and subject to the laws of Nature. One and
indivisible at the root it has grown into a vast tree with
innumerable branches. The changes in the seasons
affect it. It has its autumn and summer, its winter and
spring. The rains nourish and fructify it too. It is and is
not based on scriptures. It does not derive its authority
from one book. The Gita is universally accepted, but
even then it only shows the way. It has hardly any effect
on custom. Hinduism is like the Ganga pure and
unsullied at its source, but taking in its course the
impurities in the way. Even like the Ganga it is benefi-
cent in its total effect. It takes a provincial form in every
province, but the inner substance is retained every-
where. Custom is not religion. Custom may change, but
religion will remain unaltered.

Purity of Hinduism depends on the self-restraint
of its votaries. Whenever their religion has been in
danger, the Hindus have undergone rigorous penance,
searched the causes of the danger and devised means
for combating them. The shastras are ever growing. The

24 What is Hinduism?


Vedas, the Upanishads, the Smritis, the Puranas, and the
Itihasas did not arise at one and the same time. Each
grew out of the necessities of particular periods, and
therefore they seem to conflict with one another. These
books do not enunciate anew the eternal truths but
show how these were practised at the time to which the
books belong. A practice which was good enough in a
particular period would, if blindly repeated in another,
land people into the 'slough of despond'. Because the
practice of animal-sacrifice obtained at one time, shall
we revive it today? Because at one time we used to eat
beef, shall we also do so now? Because at one time, we
| used to chop off the hands and feet of thieves, shall we
revive that barbarity today? Shall we revive polyandry?
Shall we revive child-marriage? Because we discarded
a section of humanity one day, shall we brand their
j descendants today as outcastes?

Hinduism abhors stagnation. Knowledge is limit-
less and so also the application of truth. Everyday we
add to our knowledge of the power of Atman, and we
shall keep on doing so. New experience will teach us
new duties, but truth shall ever be the same. Who has
ever known it in its entirety? The Vedas represent the
truth, they are infinite. But who has known them in their
entirety? What goes today by the name of the Vedas are
not even a millionth part of the real Veda — the Book of
Knowledge. And who knows the entire meaning of
even the few books that we have? Rather than wade
through these infinite complications, our sages taught
us to learn one thing: 'As with the Self, so with the
Universe'. It is not possible to scan the universe, as it is
to scan the self. Know the self and you know the
universe. But even knowledge of the self within presup-
poses ceaseless striving —not only ceaseless but pure,
and pure striving presupposes a pure heart, which in its


Hinduistn of Today 25



turn depends on the practice o fyamas* and niyamas — the
cardinal and casual virtues.

This practice is not possible without God's grace
which presupposes Faith and Devotion. This is why
Tulsidas sang of the glory of Ramanama, that is why the
author of the Bhagawata taught the Dxvadashakshara Man-
tra (Om Namo Bhagawate Vasudevaya). To my mind he is
a Sanatani Hindu who can repeat this mantra from the
heart. All else is a bottomless pit, as the sage Akho f has
said.

Europeans study our manners and customs. But
theirs is the study of a critic not the study of a devotee.
Their 'study' cannot teach me religion.

Hinduism does not consist in eating and non-
eating. Its kernel consists in right conduct, in correct
observance of truth and non-violence. Many a man
eating meat, but observing the cardinal virtues of com-
passion and truth, and living in the fear of God, is a
better Hindu than a hypocrite who abstains from meat,
And he whose eyes are opened to the truth of the
violence in beef-eating or meat-eating and who has
therefore rejected them, who loves 'both man and bird
and beast' is worthy of our adoration. He has seen and
known God; he is His best devotee. He is the teacher of
mankind.

Hinduism and all their religions are being weighed
in the balance. Eternal truth is one. God also is one. Let
every one of us steer clear of conflicting creeds and
customs and follow the straight path of truth. Only then

*Yamas, the cardinal virtues, according to Yogashastra, are Ahimsa
(non-violence), Satya (truth), Asteya (non-stealing), Brahmacharya
(celibacy), Aparigraha (non-possession). The Niyamas or the casual
virtues are, according to the same authority, Shaucha (bodily pu-
rity), Santosha (contentment), Tapa (forbearance), Swadhyaya (study
of scriptures), tshxvarapranidhana (resignation to the will of God).

--M.D.

A poet-seer of Gujarat.


shall we be true Hindus. Many styling themselves
sanatanis stalk the earth. Who knows how few of them
will be chosen by God? God's grace shall descend on
those who do His will and wait upon Him, not on those
who simply mutter 'Rama Rama'.

Young India, 8 April 1926


Hinduism of Today


27





The Hydra-headed Monster


The stories told in the Puranas are some of them most
dangerous, if we do not know their bearing on the
present conditions. The shastras would be death-traps if
we were to regulate our conduct according to every
detail given in them or according to that of the charac-
ters therein described. They help us only to define and
argue out fundamental principles. If some well-known
character in religious books sinned against God or man,
is that a warrant for our repeating the sin? It is enough
for us to be told, once for all, that T ruth is the only thing
that matters in the world, that Truth is God. It is
irrelevant to be told that even Yudhishthira was be-
trayed into an untruth. It is more relevant for us to know
that when he spoke an untruth, he had to suffer for it
that very moment and that his great name in no way
protected him from punishment. Similary, it is irrele-
vant for us to be told that Adishankara avoided a
chandala. It is enough for us to know that a religion that
teaches us to treat all that lives as we treat ourselves,
cannot possibly countenance the inhuman treatment of
a single creature, let alone a whole class of perfectly


28


What is Hinduism?


innocent human beings. Moreover we have not even all
the facts before us to judge what Adishankara did or did
not do. Still less, do we know the meaning of the word
chandala where it occurs. It has admittedly many mean-
ings, one of which is a sinner. But if all sinners are to be
regarded as untouchables, it is very much to be feared
that we should all, not excluding the Pandit* himself, be
under the ban of untouchability. That untouchability is
an old institution, nobody has ever denied. But, if it is an
evil, it cannot be defended on the ground of its anti-
quity.

Young India, 29 July 1926


*This article from which this excerpt is made was written in answer
to a plea for untouchability made by a Pandit from the South*






Tulsidas


Several friends on various occasions have addressed tc
me criticisms regarding my attitude towards the Tulsi-
Ramayana. The substance of their criticisms is as follows:
You have described the Ramayana as the best ol
books, but we have never been able to reconcile
ourselves with your view. Do not you see how
Tulsidas has disparaged womankind, defended
Rama s unchivalrous ambuscade on Vali, praised
Vibhishan for betrayal of his country, and des-
| cribed Rama as an avatara in spite of his gross
injustice to Sita? What beauty do you find in a book
like this? Or do you think that the poetic beauty of
the book compensates for everything else? if it is so
then we venture to suggest that you have no
qualifications for the task.

1 admit that if we take the criticisms of every point
individually they will be found difficult to refute and
the whole of the Ramayana can, in this manner, be easily
condemned. But that can be said of almost everything
and everybody. There is a story related about a cele-
bratea artist that in order to answer his critics he p ut his

^ What i $ Hinduism?


picture in a show window and invited visitors to indi-
cate their opinionby marking the spot they did not like.
The result was that there was hardly any portion that
was not covered by the critics' marks. As a matter of fact,
however, the picture was a masterpiece of art. Indeed
even the Vedas, the Bible and the Quran have not been
exempt from condemnation. In order to arrive at a
proper estimate of a book it must be judged as a whole.
So much for external criticism. The internal test of a
book consists in finding out what effect it has produced
on the majority of its readers. Judged by either method
the position of the Ramayana as a book par excellence
remains unassailable. This, however, does not mean
that it is absolutely faultless. But it is claimed on behalf
of the Ramayana that it has given peace to millions, has
given faith to those who had it not, and is even today
serving as a healing balm to thousands who are burnt
by the fire of unbelief. Every page of it is overflowing
with devotion. It is a veritable mine of spiritual experi-
ence.

It is true that the Ramayana is sometimes used by
evil-minded persons to support their evil practices. But
that is no proof of evil in the Ramayana. I admit that
Tulsidas has, unintentionally as 1 think, done injustice
to womankind. In this, as in several other respects also,
he has failed to rise above the prevailing notions of his
age. In other words Tulsidas was not a reformer; he was
only a prince among devotees. The faults of the Rama-
yana are less a reflection on T ulsidas than a reflection on
the age in which he lived.

What should be the attitude of the reformer re-
garding the position of women or towards Tulsidas
under such circumstances? Can he deriveno help what-
ever from Tulsidas? The reply is emphatically 'he can'.
In spite of disparaging remarks about women in the
Ramayana it should not be forgotten that in it Tulsidas


Tulsidas


31




has presented to the world his matchless picture of Sita.
Where would Rama be without Sita? We find a host of
other ennobling figures like Kausalya, Sumitra etc. in
the Ramayana. We bow our head in reverence before the
faith and devotion of Shabari and Ahalya. Ravana was
a monster but Mandodari was a sati. In my opinion
these instances goto prove that Tulsidas was no reviler
of women by conviction. On the contrary, so far as his
convictions went, he had only reverence for them. So
much for Tulsidas’s attitude towards women.

In the matter of the killing of Vali, however, there
is room for two opinions. In Vibhishan I can find no
fault. Vibhishan offered Satyagraha against his brother.
His example teaches us that it is a travesty of patriotism
to sympathize with or try to conceal the faults of one's
rulers or country, and to oppose them is the truest
patriotism. By helping Rama Vibhishan rendered the
truest service to his country. The treatment of Sita by
Rama does not denote heartlessness. It is a proof of a
duel between kingly duty and a husband's love for wife.

To the sceptics who feel honest doubts in connec-
tion with the Ramayana, I would suggest that they
should not accept anybody’s interpretations mechani-
cally. They should leave out such portions about which
they feel doubtful. Nothing contrary to truth and ahimsa
need be condoned. It would be sheer perversity to argue
that because in our opinion Rama practised deception,
we too may do likewise. The proper thing to do would
be to believe that Rama was incapable of practising
deception. As the Gita says, 'There is nothing in the
world that is entirely free from fault.' Let us, therefore,
like the fabled swan who rejects the water and takes
only the milk, learn to treasure only the good and reject
the evil in everything. Nothing and no one is perfect but
God.

Young India, 31 October 1929


What is Hinduism?



14

Weekly Letter
(Other Questions)

[Gandhiji's conversation with Mr. Basil Mathews who
was curious to know if Gandhiji followed any spiritual
practices and what special reading he had found help-
ful:]

Gandhiji: I am a stranger to yogic practices. The
practice I follow is a practice I learnt in my childhood
from my nurse. 1 was afraid of ghosts. She used to say
to me: 'There are no ghosts, but if you are afraid, repeat
Ramanama.' What I learnt in my childhood has become
a huge thing in my mental firmament. It is a sun that has
brightened my darkest hour. A Christian may find the
same solace from the repetition of the name of Jesus and
a Muslim from the name of Allah. All these things have
the same implications and they produce identical re-
sults under identical circumstances. Only the repetition
must not be a lip expression, but part of your very being.

About helpful readings, we have regular readings
of.the Bhagawadgita and we have now reached a stage
when we finish the Gita every week by having readings
of appointed chapters every morning. Then we have


Week ly Letter




hymns from the various saints of India, and we therein
include hymns from the Christian hymn-book. As
Khansaheb is with us, we have readings from the Quran
also. We believe in the equality of all religions. I derive
the greatest consolation from my reading of Tulsidas’s
Ramayana. I have also derived solace from the New
Testament and the Quran. I don't approach them with
a critical mind. They are to me as important as the
Bhagawadgita, though everything in the former may not
appeal to me — everything in the Epistles of Paul for-
instance — nor everything in T ulsidas. The Gita is a p ure
religious discourse given without any embellishment.
It simply describes the progress of the pilgrim soul
towards the Supreme Goal. Therefore there is no ques-
tion of selection.

Mr. Mathews : You are really a Protestant.

Gandhiji: I do not know what I am or am not, Mr.
Hodge will call me a Presbyterian!

Mr. Mathews: Where do you find the seat of author-
ity?

Gandhiji: It lies here (pointing to his breastj.J
exercise my judgement about every scripture, includ-
ing the Gita. I cannot let a scriptural text supersede my
reason. Whilst I believe that the principal books are
inspired, they suffer from a process of double distilla-
tion. Firstly, they come through a human prophet, and
then through the commentaries of interpreters. Noth-
ing in them comes from God directly . Mathew may give
one version of one text, and John may give another. 1
cannot surrender my reason whilst I subscribe to divine
revelation. And above all, 'the letter killeth, the spirit
giveth life.' But you must not misunderstand my posi-
tion. I believe in Faith also, in things where Reason has
no place, e.g. the existence of God. No argument can
move me from that faith, and like that little girl who


34


What is Hinduism?


repeated against all reason 'yet we are seven', I would
like to repeat, on being baffled in argument by a very
superior intellect, 'Yet there is God'.

Harijan, 5 December 1936


Weekly Letter


35





15

Weekly Letter

(A talk with Rao Bhadur Rajah)

In the purest type of Hinduism a brahmana, an ant, an
elephant and a dog-eater ( shwapacha ) are of the same
status. And because our philosophy is so high, and we
have failed to live up to it, that very philosophy today
stinks in our nostrils. Hinduism insists on the brother-
hood not only of all mankind but of all that lives. It is a
conception which makes one giddy, but we have to
work up to it. The moment we have restored real living
equality between man and man, we shall be able to
establish equality between man and the whole creation.
When that day comes we shall have peace on earth and
goodwill to men.

Harijan f 28 March 1936


36


What is Hinduism?



16

Weekly Letter
(The Golden Key)

For the first time at the public meeting in Quilon,
Gandhiji summed up the credal belief of Hinduism in
an Upanishadic mantra, and thereafter at every meeting
gave lucid and simple commentaries on the numerous
implications of that all-comprehensive mantra. The pure
exposition without much of a commentary was given
on the previous day at Quilon and is reproduced below:
Let me for a few moments consider what Hindu-
ism consists of, what it is that has fired so many
saints about whom we have historical record. Why
has it contributed so many philosophers to the
world? What is it in Hinduism that has so enthused
its devotees for centuries? Did they see untouch-
ability in Hinduism and still enthuse over it? In the
midst of my struggle against untouchability I have
been asked by several workers as to the essence of
Hinduism. We have no simple Kalma, they said,
that we find in Islam, nor have we John 3. 1 6 of the
Bible. Have we or have we not something that will
answer the demands of the most philosophic among


Weekly Letter


37



the Hindus or the most matter-of-factamong them?
Some have said, and not without good reason, the
Gayatri answers that purpose. I have perhaps re-
cited the Gayatri mantra a thousand times, having
understood the meaning of it. But still it seems to
me that it did not answer the whole of my aspira-
tions. Then as you are aware I have, for years past,
been swearing by the Bhagazvadgita, and have said
that it answers all my difficulties and has been my
kamadhenu, my guide, my 'open sesame', on hun-
dreds of moments of doubts and difficulty. 1 can-
not recall a single occasion when it has failed me.
But it is not a book that I can place before the whole
of this audience. It requires a prayerful study
before the kamadhenu yeilds the rich milk she holds
in her udders.

But I have fixed upon one mantra that I am going
to recite to you, as containing the whole essence of
Hinduism. Many of you, I think, know the
Ishopanishad. I read it years ago with translation
and commentary. I learnt it by heart in Yeravda
Jail. But it did not then captivate me, as it has done
during the past few months, and I have now come
to the final conclusion that if all the Upanishads and
all the other scriptures happened all of a sudden to
be reduced to ashes, and if only the first verse in the
Ishopanishad were left intact in the memory of
Hindus, Hinduism would live for ever.

Now this mantra divides itself in four parts. The
first part is flef zfj^r I It means,

as I would translate, all this that we see in this great
Universe is pervaded by God. Then come the
second and third parts which read together, as I
read them: 1 1 divide these into two

and translate them thus: Renounce it and enjoy it.


What is Hinduism?


There is another rendering which means the same
thing, though: Enjoy what He gives you. Even so
you can divide it into two parts. Then follows the
final and most important part, *tt ^ *

which means: Do not covet anybody’s wealth or
possession. All the other mantras of that ancient
Upanishad area commentary or an attempt to give
us the full meaning of the first mantra. As 1 read the
mantra in the light of the Gita or the Gita in the light
of the mantra 1 find that the Gita is a commentary on
this mantra. It seems to me to satisfy the cravings of
the socialist and the communist, of the philoso-
pher and the economist. I venture to suggest to all
who do not belong to the Hindu faith that it
satisfies their cravings also. And if it is true — and
I hold it to be true — you need not take anything in
Hinduism which is inconsistent with or contrary to
the meaning of this mantra. What more can a man
in the street want to learn than this, that the one
God and Creator and Master of all that lives per-
vades the Universe? The three other parts of the
mantra follow directly from the first. If you believe
that God pervades everything that He has created,
you must believe that you cannot enjoy anything
that is not given by Him. And seeing that He is the
Creator of His numberless children, it follows that
you cannot covet anybody's possession. If you
think that you are one of His numerous creatures,
it behoves you to renounce everything and lay it at
His feet. That means that the act of renunciation of
everything is not a mere physical renunciation but
represents a second or new birth. It is a deliberate
act, not done in ignorance. It is therefore a regen-
eration. And then since he who holds the body
must eat and drink and clothe himself, he must


Weekly Letter 39




natu rally seek all that he needs from Him. And he
gets it as a natural reward of that renunciation. As
if this was not enough the mantra closes with this
magnificent thought: Do not covet anybody's pos-
session. The moment you carry out these precepts
you become a wise citizen of the world living at
peace with all that lives, it satisfies one's highest
aspirations on this earth and hereafter,

It is this mantra that Gandhiji described at another
meeting as the golden key for the solution of all the
difficulties and doubts that may assail one's heart.
Remember that one verse of the Ishopanishad and
forget all about the other scriptures. You can of
course drown yourselves and be suffocated in the
ocean of scriptures. They are good for the learned
if they will be humble and wise, but for the ordi-
nary man in the street nothing but this mantra is
necessary to carry him across the ocean:

'God the Ruler pervades all there is in this Uni-
verse. Therefore renounce and dedicate all to Him, and
then enjoy or use the portion that may fall to thy lot.
Never covet anybody's possession/

Hanjan, 3 LI January 1937


40 What is Hinduism?



17

The Haripad Speech*

At this meeting I would love to detain you for a few
minutes on the message of Hinduism I gave to the
meeting in Quilon last night. I ventured at that meeting
to say that the whole of Hinduism could be summed up
in the first verse of the Ishopanishad.

zrfpPT vTTcdT

^ftsTT *TT I

Those who know a little bit of Sanskrit will find
that there is nothing abstruse there that you find in
other Vedic mantras, and its meaning is simply this: All
that there is in this Universe, great or small, including
the tiniest atom, is pervaded by God, known as Creator
or Lord. Isha means the Ruler, and He who is the Creator
naturally by very right becomes the Ruler too. And here
in this verse the seer has chosen no other epithet for the
Deity but that of the Ruler, and he has excepted nothing
from His jurisdiction. He says everything that we see is
pervaded by the Deity, and from that naturally the
other parts of the mantra follow. Thus he says, 'Re-
nounce everything,' i.e. everything that is on this Uni-
verse, the whole of the Universe, and not only this tiny

‘Full text of speech delivered by Gandhiji at Haripad in Travancore
on 17 January 1937.




globe of ours, renounce it. He asks us to renounce it as
we are such insignificant atoms that if we had any idea
of possession it would seem ludicrous. And then, says
the rishi, the reward of the renunciation is i.e.
enjoyment of all you need. But there is a meaning in the
word translated 'enjoy', which may as well be trans-
lated as 'use', 'eat' etc. It signifies, therefore, that you
may not take more than necessary for your growth.
Hence this enjoyment or use is limited by two condi-
tions. One is the act of renunciation or, as the author of
the Bhagawata would say, enjoy in the spirit of

(or offering all to God). And every day in the
morning every one who believes in the Bhagawata Dharma
has to dedicate his thoughts, words and deeds to Krishna,
and not until he has performed that daily act of renun-
ciation or dedication has he the right of touching any-
thing or drinking even a cup of water. And when a man
has performed that act of renunciation and dedication,
he derives from that act the right of eating, drinking,
clothing and housing himself to the extent necessary for
his daily life. Therefore take it as you like, either in the
sense that the enjoyment or use is the reward of renun-
ciation, or that the renunciation is the condition of
enjoyment, renunciation is essential for our very exis-
tence, for our soul. And as if that condition given in the
mantra was incomplete, the rishi hastened to complete it
by adding: 'Do not covet what belongs to another.' N ow
1 suggest to you that the whole of the philosophy or
religion found in any part of the world is contained in
this mantra, and it excludes everything contrary to it.
According to the canons of interpretation, anything that
is inconsistent with Shruti — and Ishopanishad is a Shruti —
is to be rejected altogether.

Temples Purified

Now I should like to apply this mantra to present-day
42 What is Hinduism?


conditions. If all that there is in the Universe is pervaded
by God, that is to say, if the brahmana and the bhangi, the
learned man and the scavenger, the Ezhava and the
pariah, no matter what caste they belong to — if all these
are pervaded by Lord God, in the light of this mantra,
there is none that is high and none that is low, all are
absolutely equal, equal because all are the creatures of
that Creator. And this is not a philosophical thing to be
dished out to brahmanas or kshatriyas, but it enunciates
an eternal truth which admits of no reduction, no
palliation. Therefore the Maharajah himself and the
Maharani are not one whit superior to the lowliest being
in Travancore. We are all creatures and servants of one
God. If the Maharajah is the first among equals, as he is,
he is so not by right of overlordship, but by right of
service. And therefore how nice, how noble it is that
every Maharajah is called Padmanabhadasl* Therefore
when I told you that the Maharajah or the Maharani
were not one whit superior to any one of us, 1 told you
what was the actual truth accepted by their Highnesses
themselves. And if that is so, how can anyone here dare
to arrogate superiority to himself or herself over any
other human being? I tell you, therefore, that if this
mantra holds good, if there is any man or woman here
who believes that the temples are defiled by those called
avarnas, that person 1 declare would be guilty of a grave
sin. 1 tell you that the Proclamation! has purified our
temples of the taint that had attached to them.

I would like the mantra I have recited to be en-
shrined in the hearts of all our men and women and
children, and if this contains, as I hold, the essence of
Hinduism, it should be inscribed on the portals of every
temple. Don’t you then think that we should be belying
that mantra at every step if we excluded anyone from
those temples? Therefore if you will prove yourself



deserving of the gracious Proclamation and if you will
be loyal to yourself and to those who preside over your
destinies, you will carry out the letter and spirit of this
Proclamation. From the date of the Proclamation the
Travancore temples, which as I once said were not
abodes of God, have become abodes of God, since no
one who used to be regarded as untouchable is any
more to be excluded from them. I therefore hope and
pray that throughout Travancore there may be no man
or woman who will abstain from going to the temples
for the reason that they have been opened to those who
were regarded as pariahs of society.

Harijan, 30 January 1937


44


What is Hinduism?



From the Kottayam Speech


The mantra describes God as the Creator, the Ruler, and
the Lord. The seer to whom this mantra or verse was
revealed was not satisfied with the magnificent state-
ment that God was to be found everywhere. But he went
further and said: 'Since God pervades everything noth-
ing belongs to you, not even your own body. God is the
undisputed, unchallengeable Master of everything you
possess.' And so when a person who calls himself a
Hindu goes through the process of regeneration or a
second birth, as Christians would call it, he has to
perform a dedication or renunciation of all that he has
in ignorance called his own property. And then when
he has performed this act of dedication or renunciation,
he is told that he will win a reward in the shape of God
taking good care of what he will require for food,
clothing or housing. Therefore the condition of enjoy-
ment or use of the necessaries of life is their dedication
or renunciation. And that dedication or renunciation
has got to be done from day to day, lest we may in this
busy world forget the central fact of life. And to crown
all, die seer says: 'Covet not anybody's riches.' I suggest


From the Kottayam Speech


45



to you that the truth that is embedded in this very short
mantra is calculated to satisfy the highest cravings of
every human being — whether they have reference to
this world or to the next. I have in my search of the
scriptures of the world found nothing to add to this
mantra. Looking back upon all the little I have read of the
scriptures — it is precious little I confess — I feel that
everything good in all the scriptures is derived from this
mantra. If it is universal brotherhood — not only brother-
hood of all human beings, but of all living beings — I find
it in this mantra. I f it is unshakable faith in the Lord and
Master —and all the adjectives you can think of — 1 find
it in this mantra. If it is the idea of complete surrender to
God and of the faith that He will supply all that I need
then again I say 1 find it in this mantra. Since He
pervades every fibre of my being and of all of you, I
derive from it the doctrine of equality of all creatures on
earth and it should satisfy thecravings of all philosophi-
cal communists. This mantra tells me Chat I cannot hold
as m ine anything that belongs to God, and if my life and
that of all who believe in this mantra has to be a life of
perfect dedication, it follows that it will have to be a life
of continual service of our fellow creatures.

This, 1 say, is my faith and Should be the faith of all
who call themselves Hindus. And 1 venture to suggest
to my Christian and Mussulman friends that they will
find nothing more in their scriptures if they will search
them.

Ido not wish to hide from you the fact that I am not
unaware of many superstitions that go under the name
of Hinduism. 1 am most painfully conscious of all the
superstitions that are to be found masquerading as
Hinduism, and I have no hesitation to call a spade a
spade. 1 have not hesitated to describe untouchability as
the greatest of these superstitions. But in spite of them


46 What is Hinduism?


all, I remain a Hindu. For I do not believe that these
superstitions form part of Hinduism. The very canons
of interpretation laid down by Hinduism teach me that
whatever is inconsistent with the truth I have expounded
to you and which is hidden in the wiciTttTU 1 have named/
must be summarily rejected as not belonging to Hindu-
ism.

Harijan f 30 January 1937


From the Kottayam Speech


47





19


Yajna or Sacrifice

Yajna means an act directed to the welfare of others,
done without desiring any return for it, whether of a
temporal or spiritual nature. 'Act' here must be taken in
its widest sense, and includes thought and word, as
well as deed. 'Others' embraces not only humanity, but
all life. Therefore, and also from the standpoint of
ahimsa, it is not a yajna to sacrifice lower animals even
with a view to the service of humanity. It does not
matter that animal sacrifice is alleged to find a place in
the Vedas. It is enough for us that such sacrifice cannot
stand the fundamental tests of Truth arid Non-violence.
I readily admit my incompetence in Vedic scholarship.
But the incompetence, so far as this subject is concerned,
does not worry me, because even if the practice of
animal sacrifice be proved to have been a feature of
Vedic society, it can form no precedent for a votary of
ahimsa.

Again a primary sacrifice must be an act, which
conduces the most to the welfare of the greatest number
in the widest area, and which can be performed by the
largest number of men and women with the least


48


What is Hinduism?


trouble. It will not therefore, be a yajna, much less a
mahayajna, to wish or to do ill to any one else, even in
order to serve a so-called higher interest. And the Gita
teaches, and experience testifies, that all action that
cannot come under the category of yajna promotes
bondage.

The world cannot subsist for a single moment
without yajna in this sense, and therefore the Gita, after
having dealt with true wisdom in the second chapter,
takes up in the third the means of attaining it, and
declares in so many words, that yajna came with the
Creation itself. This body, therefore, has been given us,
only in order that we may serve all creation with it. And,
therefore, says the Gita, he who eats without offering
yajna eats stolen food. Every single act of one who
would lead a life of purity should be in the nature of
yajna. Yajna having come to us with our birth, we are
debtors all our lives, and thus for ever bound to serve
the universe. And even as a bondslave receives food,
clothing and so on from the master whom he serves, so
should we gratefully accept such gifts as may be as-
signed to us by the Lord of the universe. What we
receive must be called a gift; for as debtors we are
entitled to no consideration for the discharge of our
obligations. Therefore we may not blame the Master, if
we fail to get it. Our body is His to be cherished or cast j
away according to His will. This is not a matter for
complaint or even pity; on the contrary, it is natural and
even a pleasant and desirable state, if only we realize
our proper place in God’s scheme. We do indeed need
strong faith, if we would experience this supreme bliss.
"Do not worry in the least about yourself, leave all
worry to God." — this appears to be the commandment j
in all religions.

This need not frighten any one. He who devotes
Yajna or Sacrifice


49


himself to service with a clear conscience will day by
day grasp the necessity for it in greater measure, and
will continually grow richer in faith. The path of service
can hardly be trodden by one, who is not prepared to
renounce self-interest, and to recognize the conditions
of his birth. Consciously or unconsciously every one of
us does render some service or other. If we cultivate the
habit of doing this service deliberately, our desire for
service will steadily grow stronger, and will make not
only for our own happiness, but that of the world .at
large.

* * 3f

Again, not only the good, but all of us are bound to
place our resources at the disposal of humanity. And if
such is the law, as evidently it is, indulgence ceases to
hold a place in life and gives way to renunciation. The
duty of renunciation differentiates mankind from the
beast.

Some object, that life thus understood becomes
dull and devoid of art, and leaves no room for the
householder. But renunciation here does not mean
abandoning the world and retiring into the forest. The
spirit of renunciation should rule all the activities of life.
A householder does not cease tobe one if he regards life
as a duty rather than as an indulgence. A merchant, who
operates in the sacrificial spirit, will have crores passing
through his hands, but he will, if he follows the law, use
his abilities for service. He will therefore not cheat or
speculate, will lead a simple life, will not injure a living
soul and will lose millions rather than harm anybody.
Let no one run away with the idea that this type of
merchant exists only in my imagination. Fortunately
for the world, it does exist in the West as well as in the
East. It is true, such merchants may be counted on one's
fingers' ends, but the type ceases to be imaginary, as


50 What is Hinduism?


soon as even one living specimen can be found to
answer to it. No doubt such sacrificers obtain' their
livelihood by their work. But livelihood is not their
objective, but only a by-product of their vocation. A life
of sacrifice is the pinnacle of art, and is full of true joy.
Yajna is not yajna if one feels it to be burdensome or
annoying. Self-indulgence leads to destruction, and
renunciation to immortality. Joy has no independent
existence. It depends upon Our attitude to life. One man
will enjoy theatrical scenery, another the ever new
scenes which unfold themselves in the sky. Joy, there-
fore, is a matter of individual and national education.
We shall relish things which we have been taught to
relish as children. And illustrations can be easily cited of
different national tastes.

Again, many sacrificers imagine that they are free
to receive from the people everything they need, and
many things they do not need, because they are render-
ing disinterested service. Directly this idea sways a
man, he ceases to be a servant, and becomes a tyrant
over the people.

One who would serve will not waste a thought
upon his own comforts, which he leaves to be attended
to or neglected by his Master on high. He will not
therefore encumber himself with everything that comes
his way; he will take only what he strictly needs and
leave the rest. He will be calm, free from anger and
unruffled in mind even if he finds himself inconve-
nienced. His service, like virtue, is its own reward, and
he will rest content with it.

Again, one dare not be negligent in service, or be
behindhand with it. He, who thinks that one must be
diligent only in one's personal business, and unpaid
public business may be done in any way and at any time
one chooses, has still to learn the very rudiments of the


Yajna or Sacrifice





science of sacrifice. Voluntary service of others de-
i mands the best of which one is capable, and must take
precedence over service of self. In fact, the pure devotee
consecrates himself to the service of humanity without
any reservation whatever.

From Yeravda Mandir, Chapter XIV-XV


52


What is Hinduism?


Brahman Non-Brahman Question


What we see today is not pure Hinduism, but often a
parody of it. Otherwise it would require no pleading
from me in its behalf, but would speak for itself, even as
if I was absolutely pure I would not need to speak to
you. God does not speak with His tongue, and man in
the measure that he comes near God becomes like God.
Hinduism teaches me that my body is a limitation of the
power of the soul within.

Just as in the West they have made wonderful
discoveries in things material, similarly Hinduism has
made still more marvellous discoveries in things of
religion, of the spirit, of the soul. But we have no eye for
these great and fine discoveries. We are dazzled by the
material progress that Western science has made. I am
not enamoured of that progress. In fact, it almost seems
as though God in His wisdom had prevented India
from progressing along those lines, so that it might fulfil
its special mission of resisting the onrush of materia-
lism. After all, there is something in Hinduism that has
kept it alive up till now. It has witnessed the fall of
Babylonian, Syrian, Persian and Egyptian civilizations.


Brahman Non-Brahman Question


53



Cast a look round you. Where is Rome and Greece? Can
you find today anywhere the Italy of Gibbon, or rather
the ancient Rome, for Rome was Italy? Go to Greece.
Where is the world-famous Attic civilization? Then
come to India, let one go through the most ancient
records and then look round you and you would be
constrained to say, 'Yes, 1 see here ancient India still
living.' True, there are dungheaps, too, here and there,
but there are rich treasures buried under them. And the
reason why it has survived is that the end which Hind-
uism set before it was not development along material
but spiritual lines.

Among its many contributions the idea of man’s
identity with the dumb creation is a unique one. To me
cow-worship is a great idea which is capable of expan-
sion. The freedom of Hinduism from the modem
proselytization is also to me a precious thing. It needs
no preaching. It says, 'Live the life.' It is my business, it
is your business to live the life, and then we will leave
its influence on ages. Then take its contribution in men:
Ramanuja, Chaitanya, Ramakrishna, not to speak of the
more modern names, have left their impress on Hindu-
ism. Hinduism is by no means a spent force or a dead
religion.

Then there is the contribution of the four askramas,
again a unique contribution. There is nothing like it in
the whole world. The Catholics have the order of celi-
bates corresponding to brahmacharis, but not as an insti-
tution, whereas in India every boy had to go through
the first ashrama. What a grand conception it was! Today
our eyes are dirty, thoughts dirtier and bodies dirtiest of
all, because we are denying Hinduism.

There is yet another thing I have not mentioned.
Max Muller said forty years ago that it was dawning on
Europe that transmigration is not a theory, but a fact.


54 What is Hinduism?


Well, it is entirely the contribution of Hinduism.

Today varnashramadharma and Hinduism are mis-
represented and denied by its votaries. The remedy is
not destruction, but correction. Let us reproduce in
ourselves the true Hindu spirit, and then ask whether it
satisfies the soul or. not.

Young India, 24 November 1927


Brahman Non-Brahman Question


55





God and Congress


To me God is Truth and Love: God is ethics and
morality; God is fearlessness. God is the source of Light
and Life and yet He is above and beyond all these. God
is conscience. He is even the atheism of the atheist. For
in His boundless love God permits the'atheist to live. He
is the searcher of hearts: He transcends speech and
reason. He knows us and our hearts better than we do
ourselves. He does not take us at our word for He knows
that we often do not mean it, some knowingly and
others unknowingly. He is a personal God to those who
need His personal presence. He is embodied to those
who need His touch. He is the purest essence. He
simply Is to those who have faith. He is all things to all
men. He is in us and yet above and beyond us. One may
banish the word 'God' from the Congress but one has no
power to banish the Thing itself. What is a solemn
affirmation, if it is not the same thing as in the name of
God? And surely conscience is but a poor and laborious
paraphrase of the simple combination of three letters
called God. He cannot cease to be because hideous
immoralities or inhuman brutalities are committed in


56


What is Hinduism?


His name. He is long suffering. He is patient but He is
also terrible. He is the most exacting personage in the
world and the world to come. He metes out the same
measure to us as we mete out to our neighbours — men
and brutes. With Him ignorance is no excuse. And
withal He is ever forgiving for He always gives us the
chance to repent. He is the greatest democrat the world
knows, for He leaves us 'unfettered' to make our own
choice between evil and good. He is the greatest tyrant
ever known, for He often dashes the cup from our lips
and under cover of free will leaves us a margin so
wholly inadequate as to provide only mirth for Himself
at our expense. Therefore it is that Hinduism calls it all
His sport — Lila, or calls it all an illusion — Maya. We are
not, He alone Is. And if we will be, we must eternally
sing His praise and do His will. Let us dance to the tune
of His bansi — flute, and all would be well.

Young India, 5 March 1925


God and Congress


57




22


Advaitism and God


[In answer to a friend's question, Gandhiji wrote:]

I am an advaitist and yet I can support dvaitism
(dualism). The world is changing every moment, and is
therefore unreal, it has no permanent existence. But
though it is constantly changing, it has a something
about it which persists and it is therefore to that extent
real. I have therefore no objection to calling it real and
unreal, and thus being called an anekan tavadi or a syadvadi.
But my syadvada is not the syadvada of the learned, it is
peculiarly my own. I cannot engage in a debate with
them. It has been my experience that I am always true
from my point of view, and am often wrong from the
point of view of my honest critics. I know that we are
both right from our respective points of view. And this
knowledge saves me from attributing motives to my
opponents or critics. The seven blind men who gave
seven different descriptions of the elephant were all
right from their respective points of vifew, and wrong
from the point of view of one another, and right and
wrong from the point of view of the man who knew the
elephant. 1 very much like this doctrine of the manyness

58 What is Hinduism?


of reality. It is this doctrine that has taught me to judge
a Mussulman from his own standpoint and a Christian
from his. Formerly I used to resent the ignorance of my
opponents. Today I can love them because I am gifted
with the eye to see myself as others see me and vice
versa. I want to take the whole world in the embrace of
my love. My anekantavada is the result of the twin
doctrine of satya and ahimsa.

I talk of God exactly as 1 believe Him to be. I believe
Him to be creative as well as non-creative. This too is the
result of my acceptance of the doctrine of the manyness
of reality. From the platform of the Jains I prove the non-
creative aspect of God, and from that of Ramanuja the
creative aspect. As a matter of fact we are all thinking of
the Unthinkable, describing the Indescribable, seeking
to know the Unknown, and that is why our speech
falters, is inadequate and even often contradictory. That
is why the Vedas describe Brahman as 'not this', 'not
this'. But if He or It is not this. He or It is. If we exist, if
our parents and their parents have existed, then it is
proper to believe in the Parent of the whole creation. If
He is not, we are nowhere. And that is why all of us with
one voice call one God differently as Paramatma, Ishwara,
Shiva, Vishnu, Rama, Allah, Khuda, Dada Hormuzda,
Jehova, God, and an infinite variety of names. He is one
and yet many; He is smaller than an atom, and bigger
than the Himalayas. He is contained even in a drop of
the ocean, and yet not even the seven seas can compass
Him. Reason is powerless to know Him. He is beyond
the reach or grasp of reason. But 1 need not labour the
point. Faith is essential in this matter. My logic can
make and unmake innumerable hypotheses. An atheist
might floor me in a debate. But my faith runs so very
much faster than my reason that I can challenge the
whole world and say, 'God is, was and ever shall be.'


Advaitism and Cod 59




But those who want to deny His existence are at
liberty to do so. He is merciful and compassionate. He
is not an earthly king needing an army to make us
accept His sway. He allows us freedom, and yet His
compassion commands obedience to His will. But if any
one of us disdain to bow to His will. He says: 'So be it.
My sun will shine no less for thee, my clouds will rain
no less for thee. 1 need not force thee to accep t my sway. '
Of such a God let the ignorant dispute the existence. I
am one of the millions of wise men who believe in Him
and am never tired of bowing to Him and singing His
glory.

Young India, 21 January 1926


60


What is Hinduism?



23


God Is


There is an indefinable mysterious Power that pervades
everything. I feel it, though I do not see it. It is this
unseen Power which makes itself felt and yet defies all
proof, because it is so unlike all that I perceive through
my senses. It transcends the senses.

But it is impossible to reason out the existence of
God to a limited extent. Even in ordinary affairs we
know that people do not know who rules or why, and
how he rules. And yet they know that there is a power
that certainly rules. In m y tour last year in Mysore I met
many poor villagers and I found upon inquiry that they
did not know who ruled Mysore. They simply said
somegod ruled it. If theknowledge of thesepoor people
was so limited about their ruler I who am infinitely
lesser than God, than they than their ruler, need not be
surprised if I do not realize the p resence of God the King
of kings. Nevertheless 1 do feel as the poor villagers felt
about Mysore that there is orderliness in the Universe,
there is an unalterable Law governing everything and
every being that exists or lives. It is not a blind law; for
no blind law can govern the conduct of living beings.


God Is


61




and thanks to the marvellous researches of Sir J. C. Bose,
it can now be proved that even matter is life. That Law
then which governs all life is God. Law and the Law-
giver are one. I may not deny the Law or the Law-giver,
because I know so little about It or Him. Even as my
denial or ignorance of the existence of an earthly power
will avail me nothing, so will not my denial of God and
His Law liberate me from its operation; whereas humble
and mute acceptance of divine authority makes life's
journey easier even as the acceptance of earthly rule
makes life under it easier.

I do dimly perceive that whilst everything around
me is ever changing, ever dying, there is underlying all
that change a living power that is changeless, that holds
all together, that creates, dissolves and recreates. That
informing power or spirit is God. And since nothing
else I see merely through the senses can or will persist,
He alone is.

And is this power benevolent or malevolent? I see
it is purely benevolent. For I can see that in the midst of
death life persists, in the midst of untruth truth persists,
in the midst of darkness light persists. Hence I gather
that God is Life, Truth, Light. He is Love. He is the
Supreme Good.

But He is no God who merely satisfies the intellect,
if He ever does. God to be God must rule the heart and
transform it. He must express Himself in every smallest
act of His votary. This can only be done through a
definite realization more real than the five senses can
ever produce. Sense perceptions can be, often are, false
and deceptive, however real they may appear to us.
Where there is realization outside the senses it is infal-
lible. It is proved not by extraneous evidence but in the
transformed conduct and character of those who have
felt the real presence of God within. ■

Such testimony is to be found in the experiences of

62 What is Hinduism?


an unbroken line of prophets and sages in all countries
and climes. To reject this evidence is to deny myself.

This realization is preceded by an immovable faith.
He who would in his own person test the fact of God's
presence can do so by a living faith. And since faith itself
cannot be proved by extraneous evidence, the safest
course is to believe in the moral government of the
world and therefore in the supremacy of the moral law,
the law of truth and love. Exercise of faith will be the
safest where there is a clear determination summarily to
reject all that is contrary to Truth and Love.

I cannot account for the existence of evil by any
rational method. To want to do so is to be coequal with
God. I am therefore humble enough to recognize evil as
such. And I call God long suffering and patient pre-
cisely because He permits evil in the world. I know that
He has no evil. He is the author of it and yet untouched
by it.

I know too that I shall never know God if I do not
wrestle with and against evil even at the cost of lifeitself.
I am fortified in the belief by my own humble and
limited experience. The purer I try to become, the nearer
I feel to be to God. How much more should I be, when
my faith is not a mere apology as it is today but has
become as immovable as the Himalayas and as white
and bright as the snows on their peaks? Meanwhile I
invite the correspondent to pray with Newman who
sang from experience:

Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom,
Lead Thou me on:

The night is dark and I am far from home.

Lead Thou me on.

Keep Thou my feet, I do not ask to see
. The distant scene; one step enough for me.

Young India, 11 October 1928

God Is 63




24


Letter from Europe

[Replying to a question asked of him at a meeting in
Switzerland on his way back from the Round Table
Conference in London, Gandhiji said:]

You have asked me why I consider that God is
Truth. In my early youth I was taught to repeat what in
Hindu scriptures are known as one thousand names of
God. But these one thousand names of God were by no
means exhaustive. We believe— and I think it is the
truth — that God has as many names as there are crea-
tures and, therefore, we also say that God is nameless
and since God has many forms we also consider Him
formless, and since He speaks to us through many
tongues we consider Him to be speechless and so on.
And so when I came to study Islam I found that Islam
too had many names for God. I would say with those
who say God is Love, God is Love. But deep down in me
I used to say that though God may be love, God is Truth,
above all. If it is possible for the human tongue to give
the fullest description of God, I have come to the
conclusion that for myself, God is Truth. But two years
ago I went a step further and said that Truth is God. You


What is Hinduism?


will see the fine distinction between the two statements,
viz. that God is Truth and Truth is God. And I came to
that conclusion after a continuous and relentless search
after Truth which began nearly fifty years ago. I then
found that the nearest approach to Truth was through
love. But I also found that love has many meanings in
the English language at least and that human love in the
sense of passion could become a degrading thing also.
I found too that love in the sense of ahimsa had only a
limited number of votaries in the world. But I never
found a double meaning in connection with truth and
even atheists had not demurred to the necessity or
power of truth. But in their passion for discovering
truth the atheists have not hesitated to deny the very
existence of God — from their own point of view rightly.
And it was because of this reasoning that I saw that
rather than say that God is T ruth I should say that Truth
is God. I recall the name of Charles Bradlaugh who
delighted to call himself an atheist, but knowing as I do
something of him, I would never regard him as an
atheist. I would call him a God-fearing man, though I
know that he would reject the claim. His face would
redden if I would say "Mr. Bradlaugh, you are a truth-
fearing man, and so a God-fearing man." I would
automatically disarm his criticism by saying that Truth
is God, as I have disarmed criticisms of many a young
man. Add to this the great difficulty that millions have
taken the name of God and in His name committed
nameless atrocities. Not that scientists very often do not
commit cruelties in the name of truth. I know how in the
name of truth and science inhuman cruelties are perpe-
trated on animals when men perform vivisection. There
are thus a number of difficulties in the way, no matter
how you describe God. But the human mind is a limited
thing, and you have to labour under limitations when


Letter from Europe


65




you think of a being or entity who is beyond the power
of man to grasp.

And then we have another thing in Hindu philoso-
phy, viz. God alone is and nothing else exists, and the
same truth you find emphasized and exemplified in the
Kalma of Islam. There you find it clearly stated — that
God alone is and nothing else exists. In fact the Sanskrit
word for Truth is a word which literally means that
which exists — Sat. For these and several other reasons


that I can give you I have come to the conclusion that the
definition, 'Truth is God', gives me the greatest satisfac-
tion. And when you want to find Truth as God the only
inevitable means is Love, i.e. non-violence, and since I
believe that ultimately the means and the end are
convertible terms, I souid not hestitate to say that God
is Love.

'What then is Truth?'

A difficult question, (said Gandhiji), but I have
solved it for myself by saying that it is what the voice
within tells you. How, then, you ask, different people
think of different and contrary truths? Well, seeing that
the human mind works through innumerable media
and that the evolution of the human mind is not the
same for all, it follows that what may be truth for one
may be untruth for another, and hence those who have
made these experiments have come to the conclusion
that there are certain conditions to be observed in
making those experiments. Just as for conducting scien-
tific', experiments there is an indispensable scientific
course of instruction, in the same way strict preliminary
discipline is necessary to qualify a person to make
experiments in the spiritual realm. Every one should,
therefore, realize his limitations before he speaks of his
inner voice. Therefore we have the belief based upon '
experience, that those who would make individual


search after truth as God, must go through several
vows, as for instance, the vow of truth, the vow of brah
macharya (purity)— for you cannot possibly divide your
love for Truth and God with anything else— the vow of
non-violence, of poverty and non-possession. Unless
you impose on yourselves the five vows you may not
embark on the experiment at all. There are several other
conditions prescribed, but I must not take you through
all of them. Suffice it to say that those who have made
these experiments know that it is not proper for every
one to claim to hear the voice of conscience, and it is
because we have at the present moment everybody
claiming the right of conscience without going through
any discipline whatsoever and there is so much untruth
being delivered to a bewildered world, all that I can, in
true humility, present to you is that truth is not to be
found by anybody who has not got an abundant sense
of h umili ty If you would swim on the bosom of the
ocean of Truth you must reduce yourself to a zero.
Further than this I cannot goalong this fascinating path.

Young India , 31 December 1931


66


What is Hinduism?


Letter from Europe


67




25


Approach Temples in Faith

[During the course of his speech delivered at Trivandrum
in connection with T ravancore Temple Entry Proclama-
tion Celebrations, Gandhiji said:]

In the days of my youth 1 went to many temples
with the faith and devotion with which my parents had
fired me. But of late years I have not been visiting
temples, and ever since I have been engaged in anti-
untouchability work, I have refrained from going to
temples unless they were open to every one called
untouchable. So what 1 saw this morning at the temple
dawned upon me with the same newness with which it
must have dawned upon so many avarna Hindus who
must have gone to the temple after the Proclamation. In
imagination my mind travelled back to the pre-historic
centuries when temples began to convey the message of
God in stone and metal. I saw quite clearly that the
priest who was interpreting each figure in his own
choice Hindi did not want to tell me that each of those
figures was God. But without giving me that particular
interpretation he made me realize that these temples
were so many bridges between the Unseen, Invisible


68 What is Hinduism?


and Indefinable God and ourselves who are infinitesi-
mal drops in the Infinite Ocean. We the human family
are not all philosophers. We are of the earth very earthy,
and we are not satisfied with contemplating the Invisi-
ble God. Somehow or other we want something which
we can touch, something which we can see, something
before which we can kneel down. It does not matter
whether it is a book, or an empty stone building, or a
stone building inhabited by numerous figures. A book
will satisfy some, an empty building will satisfy some
others, and many others will not be satisfied unless they
see something inhabiting these empty buildings. Then
I ask you to approach these temples not as if they
represented a body of superstitions. If you will ap-
proach these temples with faith in them, you will know
that each time you visit them you will come away from
them purified, and with your faith m ore and more in the
living God.

Harijan , 23 January 1937


Approach Temples in Faith 69




26


The Meaning of the Gita

A friend puts forward the following poser:

The controversy about the teaching of the Gita —
whether it is himsa (violence) or ahimsa (non-vio
lence) — will, it seems, go on for a long time. It is
one thing what meaning we read in the Gita, or
rather we want to read in the Gita ; it is another
what meaning is furnished by an unbiased reading
of it. The question, therefore, does not present
much difficulty to one who implicitly accepts ahimsa
as the eternal principle of life. He will say that the
Gita is acceptable to him only if it teaches ahimsa. A
grand book like the Gita could, for him, inculcate
nothing grander than the eternal religious prin-
ciple of ahimsa. If it did not it would cease to be his
unerring guide. It would still be worthy of his high
regard, but not an infallible authority.

In the first chap ter we find Arjuna laying down his
weapons, under the influence of ahimsa, and ready
to die at the hands of the Kauravas. He conjures up
a vision of the disaster and the sin involved in
himsa. He is overcome with ennui and in fear and


70 What is Hinduism?


trembling exclaims: "Oh what a mighty sin we are
up to!'

Shri Krishna catches him in that mood and tells
him: 'Enough of this high philosophy; No one kills
.or is killed. The soul is immortal and the body must
perish. Fight then the fight that has come to thee as
a matter of duty. Victory or defeat is no concern of
thine. Acquit thyself of thy task.'

In the eleventh chapter the Lord presents a pano-
ramic vision of the Universe and says: 'I am Kala,
the Destroyer of the worlds, the Ancient of Days;
I am here engaged in My task of destruction of the
worlds. Kill thou those already killed by Me. Give
not thyself up to grief.'

Himsa and ahimsa are equal before God. But for
man what is God’s message? Is it this: 'Fight; for
thou art sure to foil thy enemies in the field'? If the
Gita teaches ahimsa the first and the eleventh chap-
ters are not consistent with the rest, at any rate do
not support the ahimsa theory. I wish you could
find time to resolve my doubt.

The question put is eternal and every one who has
studied the Gita must needs find out his own solution.
And although I am going to offer mine, I know that
ultimately one is guided not by the intellect but by the
heart. The heart accepts a conclusion for which the
intellect subsequently finds the reasoning. Argument
follows conviction. Man often finds reasons in support
of whatever he does or wants to do.

I shall therefore appreciate the position of those
who are unable to accept my interpretation of the Gita.
All I need do is to indicate how I reached my meaning,
and what canons of interpretation 1 have followed in
arriving at it. Mine is but to fight for my meaning, no
matter whether I win or lose.


The Meaning of the Gita 71



My first acquaintance with the Gita was in 1889,
when I was almost twenty. I had not then much of an
inkling of the principle of ahimsa. One of the lines of the
Gujarati poet, Shamalbhatta, had taught me the prin-
ciple of winning even the enemy with love, and that
teaching had gone deep into me. But 1 had not deduced
the eternal principle of non-violence from it. It did not,
for instance, cover all animal life. I had, before this,
tasted meat whilst in India. I thought it a duty to kill
venomous reptiles like the snake. It is my conviction
today that even venomous creatures may not be killed
by a believer in ahimsa. I believed in those days in
preparing ourselves for a fight with the English. I often
repeated a Gujarati poet's famous doggerel: 'What
wonder if Britain rules!' etc. My meat-eating was as a
first step to qualify myself for the fight with the English.
Such was my position before I proceeded to England,
and there I escaped meat-eating etc. because of my
determination to follow unto death the promises I had
given to my mother. My love for truth has saved me
from many a pitfall.

Now whilst in England my contact with two Eng-
lish friends made me read the Gita. I say 'made me read',
because it was not of my own desire that I read it. But
when these two friends asked me to read the Gita with
them, I was ashamed of my ignorance. The knowledge
of my total ignorance of my scriptures pained me. Pride,
I think, was at the bottom of this feeling. My knowledge
of Sanskrit was not enough to enable me to understand
all the verses of the Gita unaided. The friends, of course,
were quite innocent of Sanskrit. They placed before me
Sir Edwin Arnold's magnificent rendering of the Gita. I
devoured the contents from cover to cover and was
entranced by it. The last nineteen verses of the second
chapter have since been inscribed on the tablet of my


72 What is Hinduism?


heart. They contain for me all knowledge. The truths
they teach are the 'eternal verities'. There is reasoning in
them but they represent realized knowledge.

I have since read many translations and many
commentaries, have argued and reasoned to my heart's
content but the impression that the first reading gave
me has never been effaced. Those verses are the key to
the interpretation of the Gita. I would even advise
rejection of the verses that may seem to be in conflict
with them. But a humble student need reject nothing.
He will simply say: 'It is the limitation of my own
intellect that I cannot resolve this inconsistency. 1 might
be able to do so in the time to come. ' That is how he will
plead with himself and with others.

A prayerful study and experience are essential for
a correct interpretation of the scriptures. The injunction
that a shudra may not study the scriptures is not entirely
without meaning. A shudra means a spiritually
uncultured, ignorant man. He is more likely than not to
misinterpret the Vedas and other scriptures. Every one
cannot solve an algebraical equation. Some preliminary
study is a sine qua non. How ill would the grand truth 'I
am Brahman' lie in the mouth of a man steeped in sin! To
what ignoble purposes would he turn it! What a distor-
tion it would suffer at his hands!

A man therefore who would interpret the scrip-
tures must have the spiritual discipline. He must prac-
tise the yamas and niyamas — the eternal guides of con-
duct. A superficial practice thereof is useless. The shastras
have enjoined the necessity of a guru. But a guru being
rare in these days, a study of modem books inculcating
bhakti has been suggested by the sages. Those who are
lacking in bhakti, lacking in faith, are ill-qualified to
interpret the scriptures. The learned may draw an
elaborately learned interpretation out of them, but that


The Meaning of the Gita 73





will not be the true interpretation. Gnlythe experienced
will arrive at the true interpretation of the scriptures.

But even for the inexperienced there are certain
canons. That interpretation is not true which conflicts
with Truth. To one who doubts even Truth, the scrip-
tures have no meaning. No one can contend with him
There is danger for the man who has failed to find ahimsa
in the scriptures, but he is not doomed. Truth— Sat— is
positive; non-violence is negative. Truth stands for the
fact, non-violence negatives the fact. And yet non-
violence is the highest religion, truth is self-evident;
non-violence is its maturest fruit. It is contained in
Truth, but as it is not self-evident a man may seek to
interpret the shastras, without accepting it. But his ac-
ceptance of Truth is sure to lead him to the acceptance
of non-violence.

Renunciation of the flesh is essential for realizing
Truth. The sage who realized Truth found non-violence
out of the violence raging all about him and said:
Violence is unreal, non-violence is real. Realization of
Truth is impossible without non-violence. Brahmackarya
(celibacy), asteya (non-stealing), aparigraha (non-posses-
sion) are means to achieve ahimsa. Ahimsa is the soul of
Truth. Man is mere animal without it. A seeker after
Truth will realize all this in his search for Truth and he
will then have no difficulty in the interpretation of the
shastras.

Another canon of interpretation is to scan not the
letter but to examine the spirit. Tulsidas's Ramayana is a
notable book because it is informed with the spirit of
purity, pity and piety. There is a verse in it which
brackets drums, shudras, fools and women together as
fit to be beaten. A man who cites that verse to beat his
wife is doomed to perdition. Rama did not only not beat
his wife, butnever even sought to displease her. Tulsidas


74 What is Hinduism?


simply in serted in his poem a proverb current in his I
days, little dreaming that there would be brutes justify-
ing beating of their wives on the authority of the verse.
But assuming that Tulsidas himself followed a custom
which was prevalent in his days and beat his wife, what
then? The beating was still wrong. But the Ramayana
was not written to justify beating of wives by their
husbands. It was written to depict Rama, the perfect
man, and Sita the ideal wife, and Bharata the ideal of a
devoted brother. Any justification incidentally met with
therein of vicious customs should therefore be rejected.
Tulsidas did not write his priceless epic to teach geog-
raphy, and any wrong geography that we happen to
come across in Ramayana should be summarily rejected.

Let us examine the Gita in the light of these obser-
vations. Self-realization and its means is the theme of
the Gita, the fight between two armies being but the
occasion to expound the theme. You might, if you like,
say that the Poet himself was not against war or violence
and hence he did not hesitate to press the occasion of a
war into service. But a reading of the Mahabharata has
given me an altogether different impression. The poet
Vyasa has demonstrated the futility of war by means of
that epic of wonderful beauty. What, he asks, if the
Kauravas were vanquished? And what if the Pandavas
won? How many were left of the victors and what was
their lot? What an end Mother Kunti came to? And
where are the Yadawas today?

Where the description of the fight and justification
of violence are not the subject-matter of the epic, it is
quite wrong to emphasize those aspects. And if it is
difficult to reconcile certain verses with the teaching of
non-violence, it is far more difficult to set the whole of
the Gita in the framework of violence.

The poet when he writes is not conscious of all the j


The Meaning of the Gita 75





interpretations his composition is capable of. The beauty
of poetry is that the creation transcends the poet. The
Truth that he reaches in the highest flights of his fancy
is often not to be met with in his life. The life story of
many a poet thus belies his poetry. That the central
teaching of the Gita is not himsa but ahimsa is amply
demonstrated by the subject begun in the second chap-
ter and summarized in the concluding 18th chapter. The
treatment in the other chapters also supports the posi-
tion. Himsa is impossible without anger, withoutattach-
ment, without hatred, and the Gita strives to carry us to
the state beyond sattzva, rajas and tamas, a state that
excludes anger, hatred etc. But I can even now picture
to my mind Aijuna's eyes red with anger everytime he
drew the bow to the end of his ear.

It was not in a spirit of ahimsa that Arjuna refused
to go to battle. He had fought many a battle before. Only
this time he was overcome with false pity. He fought
shy- of killing his own kith and kin. Arjuna never
discussed the problem of killing his kith and kin. Arjuna
never discussed the problem of killing as such. He did
not say he would kill no one, even if he regarded him as
wicked. Shri Krishna knows every one's innermost
thoughts and he saw through' the temporary infatua-
tion of Arjuna. He therefore told him: 'Thou hast al-
ready done the killing. Thou canst not all at once argue
thyself into non-violence. Finish what thou hast already
begun.' If a passenger going in a Scotch Express gets
suddenly sick of travelling and jumps out of it, he is
guilty of suicide. He has not learnt the futility of travel-
ling or travelling by a railway train. Similar was the case
with Arjuna. Non-violent Krishna could give Arjuna no
other advice. But to say that the Gita teaches violence or
justifies war, because advice to kill was given a particu-
lar occasion, is as wrong as to say that himsa is the law


76 What is Hinduism?


of life, because a certain amount of it is inevitable in
daily life. To one who reads the spirit of the Gita, it
teaches the secret of non-violence, the secret of realizing
the self through the physical body.

And who are Dhritarashtra and Yudhishthira and
Arjuna? Who is Krishna? Were they all historical char-
acters? And does the Gita describe them as such? Is it
true that Arjuna suddenly stops in the midst of the fight
and puts the question to Krishna, and Krishna repeats
the whole of the Gita before him? And which is that
Gifa-the Gita that Arjuna forgot after having exclaimed
that his infatuation was gone and which he requested
Krishna to sing again, but which he could not, and
which therefore he gave in the form of Anugita?

I regard Duryodhana and his party as the baser
impulses in man, and Arjuna and his party as the higher
impulses. The field of battle is our own body. An eternal
battle is going on between the two camps and the Poet
Seer has vividly described it. Krishna is the Dweller
within, ever whispering in a pure heart. Like the watch
the heart needs the winding of purity, or the Dweller
ceases to speak.

Not that actual physical battle is out of the ques-
tion. To those who are innocent of non-violence, the Gita
does not teach a lesson of despair. He who fears, who
saves his skin, who yields to his passions, must fight the
physical battle whether he will or no; but that is not his
dharma. Dharma is one and one only. Ahimsa means
moksha, and moksha is the realization of Truth. There is
no room here for cowardice. Himsa will go on eternally
in this strange world. The Gita shows the way out of it.
But it also shows that escape out of cowardice and
despair is not the way. Better far than cowardice is
killin g and being killed in battle.

If the meaning of the verses quoted by the corres-


The Meaning of the Gita







Krishna Janmashtami

[The following is a summary of a speech delivered by
Gandhiji at Arsikere in Mysore State:]

We do not know what Shri Krishna's life means for
us, we do not read the Gita, we make no attempt to teach
it to our children. The Gita is such a transcendental book
that men of every creed, age and clime may read it with
respect, and find in it the principles of their respective
religions. If we thought of Krishna on every Janmashtami
day and read the Gita and resolved to follow its teach-
ings, we should not be in our present sorry plight. Shn
Krishna served the people all his life, he was a real
servant of the people. He could have led the hosts at
Kurukshetra, but he preferred to be Arj una’s charioteer.
His whole life was one unbroken Gita of karma. He
refused proud Duryodhana's sweets and preferred
humble Vidura's spinach. As a child he was a cowherd
and we still know him by the name of Gopala. But we,
his worshippers, have neglected the cow today, the
Adi-Kamatakas slaughter cows and eat beef, and our
infants and invalids have to go without cow’s milk.
Krishna knew no sleep or idleness. He kept sleepless


Krishna Janmashtami


79


vigil of the world, we his posterity have become indo-
lent and forgotten the use of our hands. In the
Bhagawadgita Lord Krishna has shown the path of bhakti—
which means the path of karma. Lokamanya TiJak has
shown that whether we desire to be bhaktas or jnanis,
karma is the only way; but the karma should not be for
self but for others. Action for one's own self binds,
action for the sake of others delivers from bondage.
What can be the altruistic action which can be univer-
sally done, by Hindus, Mussulmans, Christians, by
men, women and children? I have tried to demonstrate
that spinning alone is that sacrificial act, for that alone
can make us do something in God's name, something
for the poorest, something that can infuse activity in
their idle limbs. Lord Krishna has also taught that to be
a true bhakta we should make no difference between a
brahmana and a scavenger. If that is true there can be no
place for untouchability in Hinduism. If you are still
hugging that superstition you can cleanse yourself by
getting rid of it on this the sacred day of Krishna's birth.
He who swears by the Gita may know no distinction
between Hindu and Mussulman, for Lord Krishna has
declared that he who adores God in a true spirit by
whatsoever name ad ores Him. The path of bhakti, karma,
love as expounded in the Gita ', leaves no room for the
despising of man by man:

Young India, ] September 1927


80


What is Hinduism?




The Message of the Gita


1. Even in 1888-89, when I first became acquainted
with the Gita, 1 felt that it was not a historical work,
but that under the guise of physical warfare, it
described the duel that perpetually went on in the
hearts of mankind, and that physical warfare was
brought in merely to make the description of the
internal duel more alluring. This preliminary intu-
ition became more confirmed on a closer study of
religion and the Gita. A study of the Mahabharata
gave it added confirmation. I do not regard the
Mahabharata as a historical work in the accepted
sense. The Adiparva contains powerful evidence in
support of my opinion. By ascribing to the chief
actors superhuman or subhuman origins, the great
Vyasa made short work of the history of kings and
their peoples. The persons therein described may
be historical, but the author of the Mahabharata has
used them merely to drive home his religious

■ theme.

2. The author of the Mahabharata has not established
the necessityof physical warfare; on the contrary

The Message of the Gita 81



he has proved its futility. He has made the victors
shed tears of sorrow and repentance, and has left
them nothing but a legacy of miseries.

3. In this great work the Gita is the crown. Its second
chapter, instead of teaching the rules of physical
warfare, tells us how a perfected man is to be
known. In the characteristics of the perfected man
of the Gita, I do not see any to correspond to
physical warfare. Its whole design is inconsistent
with the rules of conduct governing the relations
between warring parties.

4. Krishna of the Gita is perfection and right know-
ledge personified; but the picture is imaginary.
That does not mean that Krishna, the adored of his
people, never lived. But perfection is imagined.
The idea of a perfect incarnation is an aftergrowth.

5. In Hinduism, incarnation is ascribed to one who
has performed someextraordinary service of man-
kind. All embodied life is in reality an incarnation
of God, but it is not usual to consider every living
being an incarnation. Future generations pay this
homage to one who, in his own generation, has
been extraordinarily religious in his conduct. I can
see nothing wrong in this procedure; it takes noth-
ing from God's greatness, and there is no violence
done to Truth. There is an Urdu saying which
means, "Adam is not God but he is a spark of the
Divine." And therefore he who is the most reli-
giously behaved has most of the divine spark in
him. It is in accordance with this train of thought
that Krishna enjoys, in Hinduism, the status of the
most perfect incarnation.

6. This belief in incarnation is a testimony of man's
lofty spiritual ambition. Man is not at peace with
himself till he has become like unto God. The
endeavour to reach this state is the supreme, the

82 What is Hinduism?


only ambition worth having. And this is self-
realization. This self-realization is the subject of the
Gita, as it is of all scriptures. But its author surely
did not write it to establish that doctrine. The object
of the Gita appears to me to be that of showing the
most excellent way to attain self-realization. That
which is to be found, more or less clearly, spread
out here and there in Hindu religious books, has
been brought out in the clearest possible language
in the Gita even at the risk of repetition.

7. That matchless remedy is renunciation of the fruits
of action.

8. This is the centre round which the Gita is woven.
This renunciation is the central sun, round which
devotion, knowledge and the rest revolve like
planets. The body has been likened to a prison.
There must be action where there is body. Not one
embodied being is exempted from labour. And yet
all religions proclaim that it is possible for man, by
treating the body as the temple of God, to attain
freedom. Every action is tainted, be it ever so
trivial. How can the body be made the temple of
God? In other words how can one be free from

. action, i.e. from the taint of sin? "By desireless
action; by renouncing the fruits of action; by dedi-
cating all activities to God, i.e. by surrendering
oneself to Him body and soul."

9. But desirelessness or renunciation does pot come
for the mere talking about it. It is not attained by an
intellectual feat. It is attainable only by a constant
heart-chum. Right knowledge is necessary for
attaining renunciation. Learned men possess a
knowledge of a kind. They may recite the Vedas
from memory, yet they may be steeped in self-
indulgence. In order that knowledge may not run
riot, the author of the Gifa has insisted on devotion

The Message of the Gita 83





accompanying it and has given it the first place.
Knowledge without devotion will be like a misfire.
Therefore, says the Gita, "Have devotion, and
knowledge will follow." This devotion is not mere
lip-worship, it is a wrestling with death. Hence the
Gita 's assessment of the devotee's qualities is simi-
lar to that of the sage's.

10. Thus the devotion required by tire Gita is no soft-
hearted effusiveness. It certainly is not blind faith.
The devotion of the Gita has the least to do with
externals. A devotee may use, if he likes, rosaries,
forehead marks, make offerings, but these things
are no test of his devotion. He is the devotee who
is jealous of none, who is a fount of mercy, who is
without egotism, who is selfless, who treats alike
cold and heat, happiness and misery, who is ever
forgiving, who is always contented, whose resolu-
tions are firm, who has dedicated mind and soul to
God, who causes no dread, who. is not afraid of
others, who is free from exultation, sorrow and
fear, who is pure, who is versed in action and yet
remains unaffected by it, who renounces all fruit,
good or bad, who treats friend and foe alike, who
is untouched by respect or disrespect, who is not
puffed up by praise, who does not go under when
people speak ill of him, who loves silence and
solitude, who has a disciplined reason. Such devo-
tion is inconsistent with the existence at the same
time of strong attachments.

11. We thus see, that to be a real devotee is to realize
oneself. Self-realization is not something apart.
One rupee can purchase for us poison or nectar,
but knowledge or devotion cannot buy us either
salvation or bondage. These are not media of
exchange. They are themselves the thing we want.
In other words if the means and the end are not

84 What is Hinduism?


identical, they are almost so. The extreme of means
is salvation. Salvation of the Gita is perfect peace.

12. But such know led ge and dev otion, to be true, have
to stand the test of renunciation of fruits of action.
Mere knowledge of right and wrong will not make
one fit for salvation. According to common no-
tions, a mere learned man will pass as a pandit. He
need not perform any service. He will regard it as
bondage even to lift a little lota. Where one test of
knowledge is non-liability for service, there is no .
room for such mundane work as the lifting of a lota.

13. Or take bhakti. The popular notion of bhakti is soft-
heartedness, telling beads and the like and dis-
daining to do even a loving service, lest the telling
of beads etc. might be interrupted. This bhakta
therefore leaves the rosary only for eating, drink-
ing and the like, never for grinding corn or nursing
patients.

14. But the Gita says: "No one has attained his goal
without action. Even men like Janaka attained
salvation through action. If even 1 were lazily to
ceaseworking, the world would perish. Howmuch
more necessary then for the people at large to
engage in action?"

15. While on the one hand it is beyond dispute that all
action binds, on the other hand it is equally true
that all living beings have to do some work whether
they will or no. Here all activity, whether mental or
physical, is to be included in the term action. Then
how is one to be free from the bondage of action,
even though he may be acting? The manner in
which the Gita has solved the problem is, to my
knowledge, unique. The Gita says: "Do your allot-
ted work but renounce its fruit — be detached and
work — have no desire for reward and work."

This is the unmistakable teaching of the Gita. He

The Message of the Gita 85




who gives up action-faUsr-He whergives up only the
reward rises. But renunciation of fruit in no way
means indifference to the result. In regard to every
action one must know the result that is expected to
follow, the means thereto, and the capacity for it.
He, who, being thus equipped, is without desire
for the result, and is yet wholly engrossed in the
due fulfilment of the task before him, is said to
have renounced the fruits of his action.

16. Again, let no one consider renunciation to mean
want of fruit for the renouncer. The Gita reading
does not warrant such a meaning. Renunciation
means absence of hankering after fruit. As a matter
of fact, he who renounces reaps a thousandfold.
The renunciation of the Gita is the acid test of faith.
He who is ever brooding over result often loses
nerve in the performance of his duty. He becomes
impatient and then gives vent to anger and begins
to do unworthy things; he jumps from action to
action, never remaining faithful to any. He who
broods over results is like a man given to objects of
senses; he is ever distracted, he says goodbye to all
scruples, everything is right in his estimatiort and
he therefore resorts to means fair and foul to attain
his end.

17. From the bitter experiences of desire for fruit the
author of the Gita discovered the path of renuncia-
tion of fruit, and put it before the world in most
convincing manner. The common belief is that
religion is always opposed to material good. "One
cannot act religiously in mercantile and such other
matters. There is no place for religion in such
pursuits; religion is only for attainment of salva-
tion," we hear many wordly-wise people say. In
my opinion the author of the Gita has dispelled this
delusion. He has drawn no line of demarcation


86


What is Hinduism?


between salvation and wordly pursuits. On the
contrary, he has shown that religion must rule
even our worldly pursuits. I have felt that the Gita
teaches us that what cannot be followed out in day-
to-day practice cannot be called religion. Thus,
according to the Gita, all acts that are incapable of
being performed without attachment are taboo.
This golden rule saves mankind from many a
pitfall. According to this interpretation murder,
lying, dissoluteness and the like must be regarded
as sinful and therefore taboo. Man's life then be-
comes simple, and from that simpleness springs
peace.

1 8. Thinking along these lines, I have felt that in trying
to enforce in one’s life the central teaching of the
Gita, one is bound to follow truth and ahimsa.
When there is no desire for fruit, there is no temp-
tation for untruth or himsa. Take any instance of
untruth or violence, and it will be found that at its
back was the desire to attain thecherished end. But
it may be freely admitted that the Gita was not
written to establish ahimsa. It was an accepted and
primary duty even before the Gita age. The Gita
had to deliver the message of renunciation of fruit.
This is clearly brought out as early as the second
chapter.

19. But if the Gita believed in ahimsa or it was included
in desirelessness, why did the author take a war-
like illustration? When the Gita was written, al-
though people believed in ahimsa, wars were not
only not taboo, but nobody observed the contra-
diction between them and ahimsa.

20. In assessing the implications of renunciation of
fruit, we are not required to probe the mind of the
author of the Gita as to his limitations of ahimsa and
the like. Because a poet puts a particular truth


The Message of the Gita